
Spenser:

Unquiet thought! whom at the first I bred
Of th'inward bale of my love-pined hart,
And sithens have with sighes and sorrowes fed,
Till greater then my wombe thou woxen art,
Breake forth at length out of the inner part,
In which thou lurkest lyke to vipers brood,
And seeke some succour both to ease my smart,
And also to sustayne thy selfe with food.
But if in presence of that fayrest Proud
Thou chance to come, fall lowly at her feet;
And with meek humblesse and afflicted mood
Pardon for thee, and grace for me, intreat:
  Which if she graunt, then live, and my love cherish:
  If not, die soone, and I with thee will perish.

Smith:

    Courteous Calliope, vouchsafe to lend
      Thy helping hand to my untuned song,
      And grace these lines which I to write pretend,
      Compelled by love which doth poor Corin wrong.
    And those thy sacred sisters I beseech,
      Which on Parnassus' mount do ever dwell,
      To shield my country muse and rural speech
      By their divine authority and spell.
    Lastly to thee, O Pan, the shepherds' king,
      And you swift-footed Dryades I call;
      Attend to hear a swain in verse to sing
      Sonnets of her that keeps his heart in thrall!
    O Chloris, weigh the task I undertake!
    Thy beauty subject of my song I make.

Griffin:

    Fidessa fair, long live a happy maiden!
      Blest from thy cradle by a worthy mother,
      High-thoughted like to her, with bounty laden,
      Like pleasing grace affording, one and other;
    Sweet model of thy far renowned sire!
      Hold back a while thy ever-giving hand,
      And though these free penned lines do nought require,
      For that they scorn at base reward to stand,
    Yet crave they most for that they beg the least
      Dumb is the message of my hidden grief,
      And store of speech by silence is increased;
      O let me die or purchase some relief!
    Bounteous Fidessa cannot be so cruel
    As for to make my heart her fancy's fuel!

Drayton:

    Like an adventurous sea-farer am I,
    Who hath some long and dang'rous voyage been,
    And called to tell of his discovery,
    How far he sailed, what countries he had seen,
      Proceeding from the port whence he put forth,
    Shows by his compass how his course he steered,
    When east, when west, when south, and when by north,
    As how the pole to every place was reared,
      What capes he doubled, of what continent,
    The gulfs and straits that strangely he had past,
    Where most becalmed, where with foul weather spent,
    And on what rocks in peril to be cast:
      Thus in my love, time calls me to relate
      My tedious travels and oft-varying fate.

Spenser:

The soverayne beauty which I doo admyre,
Witnesse the world how worthy to be prayzed!
The light wherof hath kindled heavenly fyre
In my fraile spirit, by her from basenesse raysed;
That being now with her huge brightnesse dazed,
Base thing I can no more endure to view:
But, looking still on her, I stand amazed
At wondrous sight of so celestiall hew.
So when my toung would speak her praises dew,
It stopped is with thoughts astonishment;
And when my pen would write her titles true,
It ravisht is with fancies wonderment:
  Yet in my hart I then both speak and write
  The wonder that my wit cannot endite.

Smith:

    Thy beauty subject of my song I make,
      O fairest fair, on whom depends my life!
      Refuse not then the task I undertake,
      To please thy rage and to appease my strife;
    But with one smile remunerate my toil,
      None other guerdon I of thee desire.
      Give not my lowly muse new-hatched the foil,
      But warmth that she may at the length aspire
    Unto the temples of thy star-bright eyes,
      Upon whose round orbs perfect beauty sits,
      From whence such glorious crystal beams arise,
      As best my Chloris' seemly face befits;
    Which eyes, which beauty, which bright crystal beam,
    Which face of thine hath made my love extreme.

Griffin:

    How can that piercing crystal-painted eye,
      That gave the onset to my high aspiring.
      Yielding each look of mine a sweet reply,
      Adding new courage to my heart's desiring,
    How can it shut itself within her ark,
      And keep herself and me both from the light,
      Making us walk in all misguiding dark,
      Aye to remain in confines of the night?
    How is it that so little room contains it,
      That guides the orient as the world the sun,
      Which once obscured most bitterly complains it,
      Because it knows and rules whate'er is done?
    The reason is that they may dread her sight,
    Who doth both give and take away their light.

Drayton:

    My heart was slain, and none but you and I;
    Who should I think the murder should commit?
    Since but yourself there was no creature by
    But only I, guiltless of murdering it.
      It slew itself; the verdict on the view
    Do quit the dead, and me not accessary.
    Well, well, I fear it will be proved by you,
    The evidence so great a proof doth carry.
      But O see, see, we need inquire no further!
    Upon your lips the scarlet drops are found,
    And in your eye the boy that did the murder,
    Your cheeks yet pale since first he gave the wound!
      By this I see, however things be past,
      Yet heaven will still have murder out at last.

Spenser:

New yeare, forth looking out of Ianus gate,
Doth seeme to promise hope of new delight,
And, bidding th'old adieu, his passed date
Bids all old thoughts to die in dumpish spright;
And calling forth out of sad Winters night
Fresh Love, that long hath slept in cheerlesse bower,
Wils him awake, and soone about him dight
His wanton wings and darts of deadly power.
For lusty Spring now in his timely howre
Is ready to come forth, him to receive;
And warns the Earth with divers colord flowre
To decke hir selfe, and her faire mantle weave.
  Then you, faire flowre! in whom fresh youth doth raine,
  Prepare your selfe new love to entertaine.

Smith:

    Feed, silly sheep, although your keeper pineth,
      Yet like to Tantalus doth see his food.
      Skip you and leap, no bright Apollo shineth,
      Whilst I bewail my sorrows in yon wood,
    Where woeful Philomela doth record,
      And sings with notes of sad and dire lament
      The tragedy wrought by her sisters' lord;
      I'll bear a part in her black discontent.
    That pipe which erst was wont to make you glee
      Upon these downs whereon you careless graze,
      Shall to her mournful music tuned be.
      Let not my plaints, poor lambkins, you amaze;
    There underneath that dark and dusky bower,
    Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will pour.

Griffin:

    Venus, and young Adonis sitting by her,
      Under a myrtle shade, began to woo him;
      She told the youngling how god Mars did try her,
      And as he fell to her, so fell she to him.
    "Even thus," quoth she, "the wanton god embraced me!"
      And then she clasped Adonis in her arms;
      "Even thus," quoth she, "the warlike god unlaced me!"
      As if the boy should use like loving charms.
    But he, a wayward boy, refused the offer,
      And ran away the beauteous queen neglecting
      Showing both folly to abuse her proffer,
      And all his sex of cowardice detecting.
    O that I had my mistress at that bay,
    To kiss and clip me till I ran away!

Drayton:

    Taking my pen, with words to cast my woe,
    Duly to count the sum of all my cares,
    I find my griefs innumerable grow,
    The reck'nings rise to millions of despairs.
      And thus dividing of my fatal hours,
    The payments of my love I read and cross;
    Subtracting, set my sweets unto my sours,
    My joys' arrearage leads me to my loss.
      And thus mine eyes a debtor to thine eye,
    Which by extortion gaineth all their looks,
    My heart hath paid such grievous usury,
    That all their wealth lies in thy beauty's books.
      And all is thine which hath been due to me,
      And I a bankrupt, quite undone by thee.

Spenser:

Rudely thou wrongest my deare harts desire,
In finding fault with her too portly pride:
The thing which I doo most in her admire,
Is of the world unworthy most envide.
For in those lofty lookes is close implide
Scorn of base things, and sdeigne of foul dishonor;
Thretning rash eies which gaze on her so wide,
That loosely they ne dare to looke upon her.
Such pride is praise, such portlinesse is honor,
That boldned innocence beares in hir eies,
And her faire countenaunce, like a goodly banner,
Spreds in defiaunce of all enemies.
  Was never in this world ought worthy tride,
  Without some spark of such self-pleasing pride.

Smith:

    Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will pour,
      As true oblations of my sincere love,
      If that will not suffice, most fairest flower,
      Then shall my sighs thee unto pity move.
    If neither tears nor sighs can aught prevail,
      My streaming blood thine anger shall appease,
      This hand of mine by vigour shall assail
      To tear my heart asunder thee to please.
    Celestial powers on you I invocate;
      You know the chaste affections of my mind,
      I never did my faith yet violate;
      Why should my Chloris then be so unkind?
    That neither tears, nor sighs, nor streaming blood,
    Can unto mercy move her cruel mood.

Griffin:

    Did you sometimes three German brethren see,
      Rancour 'twixt two of them so raging rife,
      That th' one could stick the other with his knife?
    Now if the third assaulted chance to be
    By a fourth stranger, him set on the three,
      Them two 'twixt whom afore was deadly strife
      Made one to rob the stranger of his life;
    Then do you know our state as well as we.
      Beauty and chastity with her were born,
    Both at one birth, and up with her did grow.
      Beauty still foe to chastity was sworn,
    And chastity sworn to be beauty's foe;
      And yet when I lay siege unto her heart,
      Beauty and chastity both take her part.

Drayton:

    Bright star of beauty, on whose eyelids sit
    A thousand nymph-like and enamoured graces,
    The goddesses of memory and wit,
    Which there in order take their several places;
      In whose dear bosom, sweet delicious love
    Lays down his quiver which he once did bear,
    Since he that blessed paradise did prove,
    And leaves his mother's lap to sport him there
      Let others strive to entertain with words
    My soul is of a braver mettle made;
    I hold that vile which vulgar wit affords;
    In me's that faith which time cannot invade.
      Let what I praise be still made good by you;
      Be you most worthy whilst I am most true!

Spenser:

Be nought dismayd that her unmoved mind
Doth still persist in her rebellious pride:
Such love, not lyke to lusts of baser kynd,
The harder wonne, the firmer will abide.
The durefull oake whose sap is not yet dride
Is long ere it conceive the kindling fyre;
But when it once doth burne, it doth divide
Great heat, and makes his flames to heaven aspire.
So hard it is to kindle new desire
In gentle brest, that shall endure for ever:
Deepe is the wound that dints the parts entire
With chaste affects, that naught but death can sever.
  Then thinke not long in taking litle paine
  To knit the knot that ever shall remaine.

Smith:

    You fawns and silvans, when my Chloris brings
      Her flocks to water in your pleasant plains,
      Solicit her to pity Corin's strings,
      The smart whereof for her he still sustains.
    For she is ruthless of my woeful song;
      My oaten reed she not delights to hear.
      O Chloris, Chloris! Corin thou dost wrong,
      Who loves thee better than his own heart dear.
    The flames of Aetna are not half so hot
      As is the fire which thy disdain hath bread.
      Ah cruel fates, why do you then besot
      Poor Corin's soul with love, when love is fled?
    Either cause cruel Chloris to relent,
    Or let me die upon the wound she sent!

Griffin:

    Arraigned, poor captive at the bar I stand,
      The bar of beauty, bar to all my joys;
      And up I hold my ever trembling hand,
      Wishing or life or death to end annoys.
    And when the judge doth question of the guilt,
      And bids me speak, then sorrow shuts up words.
      Yea, though he say, "Speak boldly what thou wilt!"
      Yet my confused affects no speech affords,
    For why? Alas, my passions have no bound,
      For fear of death that penetrates so near;
      And still one grief another doth confound,
      Yet doth at length a way to speech appear.
    Then, for I speak too late, the Judge doth give
    His sentence that in prison I shall live.

Drayton:

    Nothing but "No!" and "I!" and "I!" and "No!"
    "How falls it out so strangely?" you reply.
    I tell ye, Fair, I'll not be answered so,
    With this affirming "No!" denying "I!"
    I say "I love!" You slightly answer "I!"
    I say "You love!" You pule me out a "No!"
    I say "I die!" You echo me with "I!"
    "Save me!" I cry; you sigh me out a "No!"
    Must woe and I have naught but "No!" and "I!"?
    No "I!" am I, if I no more can have.
    Answer no more; with silence make reply,
    And let me take myself what I do crave;
      Let "No!" and "I!" with I and you be so,
      Then answer "No!" and "I!" and "I!" and "No!"

Spenser:

Fayre eyes! the myrrour of my mazed hart,
What wondrous vertue is contayn'd in you,
The which both lyfe and death forth from you dart
Into the obiect of your mighty view?
For when ye mildly looke with lovely hew,
Then is my soule with life and love inspired:
But when ye lowre, or looke on me askew,
Then do I die, as one with lightning fyred.
But since that lyfe is more then death desyred,
Looke ever lovely, as becomes you best;
That your bright beams, of my weak eies admyred,
May kindle living fire within my brest.
   Such life should be the honor of your light,
   Such death the sad ensample of your might.

Smith:

    You lofty pines, co-partners of my woe,
      When Chloris sitteth underneath your shade,
      To her those sighs and tears I pray you show,
      Whilst you attending I for her have made.
    Whilst you attending, dropped have sweet balm
      In token that you pity my distress,
      Zephirus hath your stately boughs made calm.
      Whilst I to you my sorrows did express,
    The neighbour mountains bended have their tops,
      When they have heard my rueful melody,
      And elves in rings about me leaps and hops,
      To frame my passions to their jollity.
    Resounding echoes from their obscure caves,
    Reiterate what most my fancy craves.

Griffin:

    Unhappy sentence, worst of worst of pains,
      To be in darksome silence, out of ken,
      Banished from all that bliss the world contains,
      And thrust from out the companies of men!
    Unhappy sentence, worse than worst of deaths,
      Never to see Fidessa's lovely face!
      O better were I lose ten thousand breaths,
      Than ever live in such unseen disgrace!
    Unhappy sentence, worse than pains of hell,
      To live in self-tormenting griefs alone;
      Having my heart, my prison and my cell,
      And there consumed without relief to moan!
    If that the sentence so unhappy be,
    Then what am I that gave the same to me?

Drayton:

    How many paltry, foolish, painted things,
    That now in coaches trouble every street,
    Shall be forgotten, whom no poet sings,
    Ere they be well wrapped in their winding sheet!
      Where I to thee eternity shall give,
    When nothing else remaineth of these days,
    And queens hereafter shall be glad to live
    Upon the alms of thy superfluous praise;
      Virgins and matrons reading these my rhymes,
    Shall be so much delighted with thy story,
    That they shall grieve they lived not in these times,
    To have seen thee, their sex's only glory.
      So shalt thou fly above the vulgar throng,
      Still to survive in my immortal song.

Spenser:

More then most faire, full of the living fire
Kindled above unto the Maker nere,
No eies, but ioyes, in which al powers conspire,
That to the world naught else be counted deare!
Thrugh your bright beams doth not the blinded guest
Shoot out his darts to base affections wound;
But angels come, to lead fraile mindes to rest
In chast desires, on heavenly beauty bound.
You frame my thoughts, and fashion me within;
You stop my toung, and teach my hart to speake;
You calme the storme that passion did begin,
Strong thrugh your cause, but by your vertue weak.
   Dark is the world where your light shined never;
   Well is he borne that may behold you ever.

Smith:

    What need I mourn, seeing Pan our sacred king
      Was of that nymph fair Syrinx coy disdained?
      The world's great light which comforteth each thing,
      All comfortless for Daphne's sake remained.
    If gods can find no help to heal the sore
      Made by love's shafts, which pointed are with fire,
      Unhappy Corin, then thy chance deplore,
      Sith they despair by wanting their desire.
    I am not Pan though I a shepherd be,
      Yet is my love as fair as Syrinx was.
      My songs cannot with Phoebus' tunes agree,
      Yet Chloris' doth his Daphne's far surpass.
    How much more fair by so much more unkind,
    Than Syrinx coy, or Daphne, I her find!

Griffin:

    Oft have mine eyes, the agents of mine heart,
      False traitor eyes conspiring my decay,
      Pleaded for grace with dumb and silent art,
      Streaming forth tears my sorrows to allay;
    Moaning the wrong they do unto their lord,
      Forcing the cruel fair by means to yield;
      Making her 'gainst her will some grace t'afford,
      And striving sore at length to win the field;
    Thus work they means to feed my fainting hope,
      And strengthened hope adds matter to each thought;
      Yet when they all come to their end and scope
      They do but wholly bring poor me to nought.
    She'll never yield although they ever cry,
    And therefore we must all together die.

Drayton:

    Love, in a humour, played the prodigal,
    And bade my senses to a solemn feast;
    Yet more to grace the company withal,
    Invites my heart to be the chiefest guest.
      No other drink would serve this glutton's turn,
    But precious tears distilling from mine eyne,
    Which with my sighs this epicure doth burn,
    Quaffing carouses in this costly wine;
      Where, in his cups, o'ercome with foul excess,
    Straightways he plays a swaggering ruffian's part,
    And at the banquet in his drunkenness,
    Slew his dear friend, my kind and truest heart.
      A gentle warning, friends, thus may you see,
      What 'tis to keep a drunkard company!

Spenser:

Long-while I sought to what I might compare
Those powrefull eies which lighten my dark spright;
Yet find I nought on earth, to which I dare
Resemble th'ymage of their goodly light.
Not to the sun, for they doo shine by night;
Nor to the moone, for they are changed never;
Nor to the starres, for they have purer sight;
Nor to the fire, for they consume not ever;
Nor to the lightning, for they still persever;
Nor to the diamond, for they are more tender;
Nor unto cristall, for nought may them sever;
Nor unto glasse, such basenesse mought offend her.
  Then to the Maker selfe they likest be,
  Whose light doth lighten all that here we see.

Smith:

    No sooner had fair Phoebus trimmed his car,
      Being newly risen from Aurora's bed,
      But I in whom despair and hope did war,
      My unpenned flock unto the mountains led.
    Tripping upon the snow-soft downs I spied
      Three nymphs more fairer than those beautys three
      Which did appear to Paris on mount Ide.
      Coming more near, my goddess I there see;
    For she the field-nymphs oftentimes doth haunt,
      To hunt with them the fierce and savage boar;
      And having sported virelays they chaunt,
      Whilst I unhappy helpless cares deplore.
    There did I call to her, ah too unkind!
    But tiger-like, of me she had no mind.

Griffin:

    Grief-urging guest, great cause have I to plain me,
      Yet hope persuading hope expecteth grace,
      And saith none but myself shall ever pain me;
      But grief my hopes exceedeth in this case;
    For still my fortune ever more doth cross me
      By worse events than ever I expected;
      And here and there ten thousand ways doth toss me,
      With sad remembrance of my time neglected.
    These breed such thoughts as set my heart on fire,
      And like fell hounds pursue me to my death;
      Traitors unto their sovereign lord and sire,
      Unkind exactors of their father's breath,
    Whom in their rage they shall no sooner kill
    Than they themselves themselves unjustly spill.

Drayton:

    There's nothing grieves me but that age should haste,
    That in my days I may not see thee old;
    That where those two clear sparkling eyes are placed,
    Only two loopholes that I might behold;
      That lovely arched ivory-polished brow
    Defaced with wrinkles, that I might but see;
    Thy dainty hair, so curled and crisped now,
    Like grizzled moss upon some aged tree;
      Thy cheek now flush with roses, sunk and lean;
    Thy lips, with age as any wafer thin!
    Thy pearly teeth out of thy head so clean,
    That when thou feed'st thy nose shall touch thy chin!
      These lines that now thou scornst, which should delight thee,
      Then would I make thee read but to despite thee.

Spenser:

Unrighteous Lord of love, what law is this,
That me thou makest thus tormented be,
The whiles she lordeth in licentious blisse
Of her freewill, scorning both thee and me?
See! how the Tyrannesse doth ioy to see
The hugh massacres which her eyes do make,
And humbled harts brings captive unto thee,
That thou of them mayst mightie vengeance take.
But her proud hart doe thou a little shake,
And that high look, with which she doth comptroll
All this worlds pride, bow to a baser make,
And al her faults in thy black booke enroll:
  That I may laugh at her in equall sort
  As she doth laugh at me, and makes my pain her sport.

Smith:

    Unto the fountain where fair Delia chaste
      The proud Acteon turned to a hart,
      I drove my flock, that water sweet to taste,
      'Cause from the welkin Phoebus 'gan depart.
    There did I see the nymph whom I admire,
      Rememb'ring her locks, of which the yellow hue
      Made blush the beauties of her curled wire,
      Which Jove himself with wonder well might view;
    Then red with ire, her tresses she berent,
      And weeping hid the beauty of her face,
      Whilst I amazed at her discontent,
      With tears and sighs do humbly sue for grace;
    But she regarding neither tears nor moan,
    Flies from the fountain leaving me alone.

Griffin:

    My spotless love that never yet was tainted,
      My loyal heart that never can be moved,
      My growing hope that never yet hath fainted,
      My constancy that you full well have proved,
    All these consented have to plead for grace
      These all lie crying at the door of beauty;--
      This wails, this sends out tears, this cries apace,
      All do reward expect of faith and duty;
    Now either thou must prove th' unkindest one,
      And as thou fairest art must cruelest be,
      Or else with pity yield unto their moan,
      Their moan that ever will importune thee.
    Ah, thou must be unkind, and give denial,
    And I, poor I, must stand unto my trial!

Drayton:

    As other men, so I myself do muse
    Why in this sort I wrest invention so,
    And why these giddy metaphors I use,
    Leaving the path the greater part do go.
      I will resolve you. I'm a lunatic;
    And ever this in madmen you shall find,
    What they last thought of when the brain grew sick,
    In most distraction they keep that in mind.
      Thus talking idly in this bedlam fit,
    Reason and I, you must conceive, are twain;
    'Tis nine years now since first I lost my wit.
    Bear with me then though troubled be my brain.
      With diet and correction men distraught,
      Not too far past, may to their wits be brought.

Spenser:

Dayly when I do seeke and sew for peace,
And hostages doe offer for ray truth,
She, cruell warriour, doth her selfe addresse
To battell, and the weary war renew'th;
Ne wilbe moov'd, with reason or with rewth,
To graunt small respit to my restlesse toile;
But greedily her fell intent poursewth,
Of my poore life to make unpittied spoile.
Yet my poore life, all sorrowes to assoyle,
I would her yield, her wrath to pacify;
But then she seeks, with torment and turmoyle,
To force me live, and will not let me dy.
  All paine hath end, and every war hafh peace;
  But mine, no price nor prayer may surcease.

Smith:

    Am I a Gorgon that she doth me fly,
      Or was I hatched in the river Nile?
      Or doth my Chloris stand in doubt that I
      With syren songs do seek her to beguile?
    If any one of these she can object
      'Gainst me, which chaste affected love protest,
      Then might my fortunes by her frowns be checked,
      And blameless she from scandal free might rest.
    But seeing I am no hideous monster born,
      But have that shape which other men do bear,
      Which form great Jupiter did never scorn,
      Amongst his subjects here on earth to wear,
    Why should she then that soul with sorrow fill,
    Which vowed hath to love and serve her still?

Griffin:

    Clip not, sweet love, the wings of my desire,
      Although it soar aloft and mount too high:
      But rather bear with me though I aspire,
      For I have wings to bear me to the sky.
    What though I mount, there is no sun but thee!
      And sith no other sun, why should I fear?
      Thou wilt not burn me, though thou terrify,
      And though thy brightness do so great appear.
    Dear, I seek not to batter down thy glory,
      Nor do I envy that thy hope increaseth;
      O never think thy fame doth make me sorry!
      For thou must live by fame when beauty ceaseth.
    Besides, since from one root we both did spring,
    Why should not I thy fame and beauty sing?

Drayton:

    To nothing fitter can I thee compare
    Than to the son of some rich penny-father,
    Who having now brought on his end with care,
    Leaves to his son all he had heaped together.
      This new rich novice, lavish of his chest,
    To one man gives, doth on another spend;
    Then here he riots; yet amongst the rest,
    Haps to lend some to one true honest friend.
      Thy gifts thou in obscurity dost waste:
    False friends, thy kindness born but to deceive thee;
    Thy love that is on the unworthy placed;
    Time hath thy beauty which with age will leave thee.
      Only that little which to me was lent,
      I give thee back when all the rest is spent.

Spenser:

One day I sought with her hart-thrilling eies
To make a truce, and termes to entertaine;
All fearlesse then of so false enimies,
Which sought me to entrap in treasons traine.
So, as I then disarmed did remaine,
A wicked ambush, which lay hidden long
In the close covert of her guilful eyen,
Thence breaking forth, did thick about me throng.
Too feeble I t'abide the brunt so strong,
Was forst to yield my selfe into their hands;
Who, me captiving streight with rigorous wrong,
Have ever since kept me in cruell bands.
  So, Ladie, now to you I doo complaine
  Against your eies, that iustice I may gaine.

Smith:

    Tell me, my dear, what moves thy ruthless mind
      To be so cruel, seeing thou art so fair?
      Did nature frame thy beauty so unkind?
      Or dost thou scorn to pity my despair?
    O no, it was not nature's ornament,
      But winged love's unpartial cruel wound,
      Which in my heart is ever permanent,
      Until my Chloris make me whole and sound.
    O glorious love-god, think on my heart's grief;
      Let not thy vassal pine through deep disdain;
      By wounding Chloris I shall find relief,
      If thou impart to her some of my pain.
    She doth thy temples and thy shrines abject;
    They with Amintas' flowers by me are decked.

Griffin:

    Winged with sad woes, why doth fair zephyr blow
      Upon my face, the map of discontent?
      Is it to have the weeds of sorrow grow
      So long and thick, that they will ne'er be spent?
    No, fondling, no! It is to cool the fire
      Which hot desire within thy breast hath made.
      Check him but once and he will soon retire.
      O but he sorrows brought which cannot fade!
    The sorrows that he brought, he took from thee,
      Which fair Fidessa span and thou must wear!
      Yet hath she nothing done of cruelty,
      But for her sake to try what thou wilt bear.
    Come, sorrows, come! You are to me assigned;
    I'll bear you all, it is Fidessa's mind.

Drayton:

    You're not alone when you are still alone;
    O God! from you that I could private be!
    Since you one were, I never since was one;
    Since you in me, myself since out of me.
      Transported from myself into your being,
    Though either distant, present yet to either;
    Senseless with too much joy, each other seeing;
    And only absent when we are together.
      Give me my self, and take your self again!
    Devise some means but how I may forsake you!
    So much is mine that doth with you remain,
    That taking what is mine, with me I take you.
      You do bewitch me! O that I could fly
      From my self you, or from your own self I!

Spenser:

In that proud port which her so goodly graceth,
Whiles her faire face she reares up to the skie,
And to the ground her eie-lids low embaseth,
Most goodly temperature ye may descry;
Myld humblesse mixt with awful! maiestie.
For, looking on the earth whence she was borne,
Her minde remembreth her mortalitie,
Whatso is fayrest shall to earth returne.
But that same lofty countenance seemes to scorne
Base thing, and thinke how she to heaven may clime;
Treading downe earth as lothsome and forlorne,
That hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime.
  Yet lowly still vouchsafe to looke on me;
  Such lowlinesse shall make you lofty be.

Smith:

    Cease, eyes, to weep sith none bemoans your weeping;
      Leave off, good muse, to sound the cruel name
      Of my love's queen which hath my heart in keeping,
      Yet of my love doth make a jesting game!
    Long hath my sufferance laboured to inforce
      One pearl of pity from her pretty eyes,
      Whilst I with restless oceans of remorse
      Bedew the banks where my fair Chloris lies,
    Where my fair Chloris bathes her tender skin,
      And doth triumph to see such rivers fall
      From those moist springs, which never dry have been
      Since she their honour hath detained in thrall;
    And still she scorns one favouring smile to show
    Unto those waves proceeding from my woe.

Griffin:

    O if my heavenly sighs must prove annoy,
      Which are the sweetest music to my heart,
      Let it suffice I count them as my joy,
      Sweet bitter joy and pleasant painful smart!
    For when my breast is clogged with thousand cares,
      That my poor loaded heart is like to break,
      Then every sigh doth question how it fares,
      Seeming to add their strength, which makes me weak;
    Yet for they friendly are, I entertain them,
      And they too well are pleased with their host.
      But I, had not Fidessa been, ere now had slain them;
      It's for her cause they live, in her they boast;
    They promise help but when they see her face;
    They fainting yield, and dare not sue for grace.

Drayton:

    Letters and lines we see are soon defaced
      Metals do waste and fret with canker's rust,
      The diamond shall once consume to dust,
    And freshest colours with foul stains disgraced;
    Paper and ink can paint but naked words,
      To write with blood of force offends the sight;
      And if with tears, I find them all too light,
    And sighs and signs a silly hope affords.
    O sweetest shadow, how thou serv'st my turn!
      Which still shalt be as long as there is sun,
      Nor whilst the world is never shall be done;
    Whilst moon shall shine or any fire shall burn,
      That everything whence shadow doth proceed,
      May in his shadow my love's story read.

Spenser:

Retourne agayne, my forces late dismayd,
Unto the siege by you abandon'd quite.
Great shame it is to leave, like one afrayd,
So fayre a peece for one repulse so light.
'Gaynst such strong castles needeth greater might
Then those small forts which ye were wont belay:
Such haughty mynds, enur'd to hardy fight,
Disdayne to yield unto the first assay.
Bring therefore all the forces that ye may,
And lay incessant battery to her heart;
Playnts, prayers, vowes, ruth, sorrow, and dismay;
Those engins can the proudest love convert:
   And, if those fayle, fall down and dy before her;
   So dying live, and living do adore her.

Smith:

    Mournful Amintas, thou didst pine with care,
      Because the fates by their untimely doom
      Of life bereft thy loving Phillis fair,
      When thy love's spring did first begin to bloom.
    My care doth countervail that care of thine,
      And yet my Chloris draws her angry breath;
      My hopes still hoping hopeless now repine,
      For living she doth add to me but death.
    Thy Phinis, dying, loved thee full dear;
      My Chloris, living, hates poor Corin's love,
      Thus doth my woe as great as thine appear,
      Though sundry accents both our sorrows move.
    Thy swan-like songs did show thy dying anguish;
    These weeping truce-men show I living languish.

Griffin:

    Compare me to the child that plays with fire,
      Or to the fly that dieth in the flame,
      Or to the foolish boy that did aspire
      To touch the glory of high heaven's frame;
    Compare me to Leander struggling in the waves,
      Not able to attain his safety's shore,
      Or to the sick that do expect their graves,
      Or to the captive crying evermore;
    Compare me to the weeping wounded hart,
      Moaning with tears the period of his life,
      Or to the boar that will not feel the smart,
      When he is stricken with the butcher's knife;
    No man to these can fitly me compare;
    These live to die, I die to live in care.

Drayton:

    If he, from heaven that filched that living fire,
      Condemned by Jove to endless torment be,
      I greatly marvel how you still go free
    That far beyond Prometheus did aspire.
    The fire he stole, although of heavenly kind,
      Which from above he craftily did take,
      Of lifeless clods us living men to make
    He did bestow in temper of the mind.
    But you broke into heaven's immortal store,
      Where virtue, honour, wit, and beauty lay;
      Which taking thence, you have escaped away,
    Yet stand as free as e'er you did before.
      Yet old Prometheus punished for his rape;
      Thus poor thieves suffer when the greater 'scape.

Spenser:

Ye tradefull Merchants, that, with weary toyle,
Do seeke most pretious things to make your gain,
And both the Indias of their treasure spoile,
What needeth you to seeke so farre in vaine?
For loe, my Love doth in her selfe containe
All this worlds riches that may farre be found:
If saphyres, loe, her eies be saphyres plaine;
If rubies, loe, hir lips be rubies sound;
If pearles, hir teeth be pearles, both pure and round;
If yvorie, her forhead yvory weene;
If gold, her locks are finest gold on ground;
If silver, her faire hands are silver sheene:
   But that which fairest is but few behold:--
   Her mind adornd with vertues manifold.

Smith:

    These weeping truce-men show I living languish,
      My woeful wailings tells my discontent;
      Yet Chloris nought esteemeth of mine anguish,
      My thrilling throbs her heart cannot relent.
    My kids to hear the rimes and roundelays
      Which I on wasteful hills was wont to sing,
      Did more delight the lark in summer days,
      Whose echo made the neighbour groves to ring.
    But now my flock all drooping bleats and cries,
      Because my pipe, the author of their sport,
      All rent and torn and unrespected lies;
      Their lamentations do my cares consort.
    They cease to feed and listen to the plaint
    Which I pour forth unto a cruel saint.

Griffin:

    When silent sleep had closed up mine eyes,
      My watchful mind did then begin to muse;
      A thousand pleasing thoughts did then arise,
      That sought by slights their master to abuse.
    I saw, O heavenly sight! Fidessa's face,
      And fair dame nature blushing to behold it;
      Now did she laugh, now wink, now smile apace,
      She took me by the hand and fast did hold it;
    Sweetly her sweet body did she lay down by me;
      "Alas, poor wretch," quoth she, "great is thy sorrow;
      But thou shall comfort find if thou wilt try me.
      I hope, sir boy, you'll tell me news to-morrow."
    With that, away she went, and I did wake withal;
    When ah! my honey thoughts were turned to gall.

Drayton:

    Since to obtain thee nothing me will stead,
    I have a med'cine that shall cure my love.
    The powder of her heart dried, when she's dead,
    That gold nor honour ne'er had power to move;
      Mixed with her tears that ne'er her true love crost,
    Nor at fifteen ne'er longed to be a bride;
    Boiled with her sighs, in giving up the ghost,
    That for her late deceased husband died;
      Into the same then let a woman breathe,
    That being chid did never word reply;
    With one thrice married's prayers, that did bequeath
    A legacy to stale virginity.
      If this receipt have not the power to win me,
      Little I'll say, but think the devil's in me!

Spenser:

One day as I unwarily did gaze
On those fayre eyes, my loves immortall light,
The whiles my stonisht hart stood in amaze,
Through sweet illusion of her lookes delight,
I mote perceive how, in her glauncing sight,
Legions of Loves with little wings did fly,
Darting their deadly arrows, fyry bright,
At every rash beholder passing by.
One of those archers closely I did spy,
Ayming his arrow at my very hart:
When suddenly, with twincle of her eye,
The damzell broke his misintended dart.
   Had she not so doon, sure I had bene slayne;
   Yet as it was, I hardly scap't with paine.

Smith:

    Which I pour forth unto a cruel saint,
      Who merciless my prayers doth attend,
      Who tiger-like doth pity my complaint,
      And never ear unto my woes will lend!
    But still false hope dispairing life deludes,
      And tells my fancy I shall grace obtain;
      But Chloris fair my orisons concludes
      With fearful frowns, presagers of my pain.
    Thus do I spend the weary wand'ring day,
      Oppressed with a chaos of heart's grief;
      Thus I consume the obscure night away,
      Neglecting sleep which brings all cares relief;
    Thus do I pass my ling'ring life in woe;
    But when my bliss will come I do not know.

Griffin:

    Care-charmer sleep! Sweet ease in restless misery!
      The captive's liberty, and his freedom's song!
      Balm of the bruised heart! Man's chief felicity!
      Brother of quiet death, when life is too too long!
    A comedy it is, and now an history;
      What is not sleep unto the feeble mind!
      It easeth him that toils and him that's sorry;
      It makes the deaf to hear, to see the blind;
    Ungentle sleep, thou helpest all but me!
      For when I sleep my soul is vexed most.
      It is Fidessa that doth master thee;
      If she approach, alas, thy power is lost!
    But here she is! See how he runs amain!
    I fear at night he will not come again.

Drayton:

    'Mongst all the creatures in this spacious round
      Of the birds' kind, the phoenix is alone,
      Which best by you of living things is known;
    None like to that, none like to you is found!
    Your beauty is the hot and splend'rous sun;
      The precious spices be your chaste desire,
      Which being kindled by that heavenly fire,
    Your life, so like the phoenix's begun.
    Yourself thus burned in that sacred flame,
      With so rare sweetness all the heavens perfuming;
      Again increasing as you are consuming,
    Only by dying born the very same.
      And winged by fame you to the stars ascend;
      So you of time shall live beyond the end.

Spenser:

The glorious pourtraict of that angels face,
Made to amaze weake mens confused skil,
And this worlds worthlesse glory to embase,
What pen, what pencil!, can expresse her fill?
For though he colours could devize at will,
And eke his learned hand at pleasure guide,
Least, trembling, it his workmanship should spill,
Yet many wondrous things there are beside:
The sweet eye-glaunces, that like arrowes glide,
The charming smiles, that rob sence from the hart,
The lovely pleasance, and the lofty pride,
Cannot expressed be by any art.
  A greater craftesmans hand thereto doth neede,
  That can expresse the life of things indeed.

Smith:

    The perils which Leander took in hand
      Fair Hero's love and favour to obtain,
      When void of fear securely leaving land,
      Through Hellespont he swam to Cestos' main,
    His dangers should not counterpoise my toil,
      If my dear love would once but pity show,
      To quench these flames which in my breast do broil,
      Or dry these springs which from mine eyes do flow.
    Not only Hellespont but ocean seas,
      For her sweet sake to ford I would attempt,
      So that my travels would her ire appease,
      My soul from thrall and languish to exempt.
    O what is't not poor I would undertake,
    If labour could my peace with Chloris make!

Griffin:

    For I have loved long, I crave reward;
      Reward me not unkindly, think on kindness;
      Kindness becometh those of high regard;
      Regard with clemency a poor man's blindness;
    Blindness provokes to pity when it crieth;
      It crieth "Give!" Dear lady, shew some pity!
      Pity or let him die that daily dieth;
      Dieth he not oft who often sings this ditty?
    This ditty pleaseth me although it choke me;
      Methinks dame Echo weepeth at my moaning,
      Moaning the woes that to complain provoke me.
      Provoke me now no more, but hear my groaning,
    Groaning both day and night doth tear my heart,
    My heart doth know the cause and triumphs in the smart.

Drayton:

    Stay, speedy time! Behold, before thou pass
      From age to age, what thou hast sought to see,
      One in whom all the excellencies be,
    In whom heaven looks itself as in a glass.
    Time, look thou too in this translucent glass,
      And thy youth past in this pure mirror see!
      As the world's beauty in his infancy,
    What it was then, and thou before it was.
    Pass on and to posterity tell this--
      Yet see thou tell but truly what hath been.
      Say to our nephews that thou once hast seen
    In perfect human shape all heavenly bliss;
      And bid them mourn, nay more, despair with thee,
      That she is gone, her like again to see.

Spenser:

The rolling wheele that runneth often round,
The hardest steele, in tract of time doth teare:
And drizling drops, that often doe redound,
The firmest flint doth in continuance weare:
Yet cannot I, with many a drooping teare
And long intreaty, soften her hard hart,
That she will once vouchsafe my plaint to heare,
Or looke with pitty on my payneful smart.
But when I pleade, she bids me play my part;
And when I weep, she sayes, teares are but water;
And when I sigh, she sayes, I know the art;
And when I waile, she turnes hir selfe to laughter.
  So do I weepe, and wayle, and pleade in vaine,
  Whiles she as steele and flint doth still remayne.

Smith:

    My love, I cannot thy rare beauties place
      Under those forms which many writers use:
      Some like to stones compare their mistress' face;
      Some in the name of flowers do love abuse;
    Some makes their love a goldsmith's shop to be,
      Where orient pearls and precious stones abound;
      In my conceit these far do disagree
      The perfect praise of beauty forth to sound.
    O Chloris, thou dost imitate thyself,
      Self's imitating passeth precious stones,
      Or all the eastern Indian golden pelf;
      Thy red and white with purest fair atones;
    Matchless for beauty nature hath thee framed,
    Only unkind and cruel thou art named!

Griffin:

    Sweet stroke,--so might I thrive as I must praise--
      But sweeter hand that gives so sweet a stroke!
      The lute itself is sweetest when she plays.
      But what hear I? A string through fear is broke!
    The lute doth shake as if it were afraid.
      O sure some goddess holds it in her hand,
      A heavenly power that oft hath me dismayed,
      Yet such a power as doth in beauty stand!
    Cease lute, my ceaseless suit will ne'er be heard!
      Ah, too hard-hearted she that will not hear it!
      If I but think on joy, my joy is marred;
      My grief is great, yet ever must I bear it;
    But love 'twixt us will prove a faithful page,
    And she will love my sorrows to assuage.

Drayton:

    To this our world, to learning, and to heaven,
      Three nines there are, to every one a nine;
      One number of the earth, the other both divine;
    One woman now makes three odd numbers even.
    Nine orders first of angels be in heaven;
      Nine muses do with learning still frequent:
      These with the gods are ever resident.
    Nine worthy women to the world were given.
    My worthy one to these nine worthies addeth;
      And my fair Muse, one Muse unto the nine.
      And my good angel, in my soul divine!--
    With one more order these nine orders gladdeth.
      My Muse, my worthy, and my angel then
      Makes every one of these three nines a ten.

Spenser:

The merry cuckow, messenger of Spring,
His trompet shrill hath thrise already sounded.
That warnes al lovers wayte upon their king,
Who now is coming forth with girland crouned.
With noyse whereof the quyre of byrds resounded
Their anthemes sweet, devized of loves prayse,
That all the woods theyr ecchoes back rebounded,
As if they knew the meaning of their layes.
But mongst them all which did Loves honor rayse,
No word was heard of her that most it ought;
But she his precept proudly disobayes,
And doth his ydle message set at nought.
  Therefore, O Love, unlesse she turne to thee
  Ere cuckow end, let her a rebell be!

Smith:

    The hound by eating grass doth find relief,
      For being sick it is his choicest meat;
      The wounded hart doth ease his pain and grief
      If he the herb dictamion may eat;
    The loathsome snake renews his sight again,
      When he casts off his withered coat and hue;
      The sky-bred eagle fresh age doth obtain
      When he his beak decayed doth renew.
    I worse than these whose sore no salve can cure,
      Whose grief no herb nor plant nor tree can ease;
      Remediless, I still must pain endure,
      Till I my Chloris' furious mood can please;
    She like the scorpion gave to me a wound,
    And like the scorpion she must make me sound.

Griffin:

    O she must love my sorrows to assuage.
      O God, what joy felt I when she did smile,
      Whom killing grief before did cause to rage!
      Beauty is able sorrow to beguile.
    Out, traitor absence! thou dost hinder me,
      And mak'st my mistress often to forget,
      Causing me to rail upon her cruelty,
      Whilst thou my suit injuriously dost let;
    Again her presence doth astonish me,
      And strikes me dumb as if my sense were gone;
      Oh, is not this a strange perplexity?
      In presence dumb, she hears not absent moan;
    Thus absent presence, present absence maketh,
    That hearing my poor suit, she it mistaketh.

Drayton:

    You cannot love, my pretty heart, and why?
    There was a time you told me that you would,
    But how again you will the same deny.
    If it might please you, would to God you could!
      What, will you hate? Nay, that you will not neither;
      Nor love, nor hate! How then? What will you do?
    What, will you keep a mean then betwixt either?
    Or will you love me, and yet hate me too?
      Yet serves not this! What next, what other shift?
    You will, and will not; what a coil is here!
    I see your craft, now I perceive your drift,
    And all this while I was mistaken there.
      Your love and hate is this, I now do prove you:
      You love in hate, by hate to make me love you.

Spenser:

In vaine I seeke and sew to her for grace,
And doe myne humbled hart before her poure,
The whiles her foot she in my necke doth place,
And tread my life downe in the lowly floure.
And yet the lyon, that is lord of power,
And reigneth over every beast in field,
In his most pride disdeigneth to devoure
The silly lambe that to his might doth yield.
But she, more cruell and more salvage wylde
Than either lyon or the lyonesse,
Shames not to be with guiltlesse bloud defylde,
But taketh glory in her cruelnesse.
  Fayrer then fayrest! let none ever say
  That ye were blooded in a yeelded pray.

Smith:

    Ye wasteful woods, bear witness of my woe,
      Wherein my plaints did oftentimes abound;
      Ye careless birds my sorrows well do know,
      They in your songs were wont to make a sound!
    Thou pleasant spring canst record likewise bear
      Of my designs and sad disparagement,
      When thy transparent billows mingled were
      With those downfalls which from mine eyes were sent!
    The echo of my still-lamenting cries,
      From hollow vaults in treble voice resoundeth,
      And then into the empty air it flies,
      And back again from whence it came reboundeth.
    That nymph unto my clamors doth reply,
    Being likewise scorned in love as well as I.

Griffin:

    My pain paints out my love in doleful verse,
      The lively glass wherein she may behold it;
      My verse her wrong to me doth still rehearse,
      But so as it lamenteth to unfold it.
    Myself with ceaseless tears my harms bewail,
      And her obdurate heart not to be moved;
      Though long-continued woes my senses fail,
      And curse the day, the hour when first I loved.
    She takes the glass wherein herself she sees,
      In bloody colours cruelly depainted;
      And her poor prisoner humbly on his knees,
      Pleading for grace, with heart that never fainted.
    She breaks the glass; alas, I cannot choose
    But grieve that I should so my labour lose!

Drayton:

    An evil spirit, your beauty, haunts me still,
    Wherewith, alas, I have been long possessed!
    Which ceaseth not to tempt me to each ill,
    Nor give me once but one poor minute's rest.
      In me it speaks whether I sleep or wake;
    And when by means to drive it out I try,
    With greater torments then it me doth take,
    And tortures me in most extremity.
      Before my face it lays down my despairs,
    And hastes me on unto a sudden death;
    Now tempting me to drown myself in tears,
    And then in sighing to give up my breath.
      Thus am I still provoked to every evil,
      By this good wicked spirit, sweet angel-devil.

Spenser:

Was it the worke of Nature or of Art,
Which tempred so the feature of her face,
That pride and meeknesse, mist by equall part,
Doe both appeare t'adorne her beauties grace?
For with mild pleasance, which doth pride displace,
She to her love doth lookers eyes allure;
And with stern countenance back again doth chace
Their looser lookes that stir up lustes impure.
With such strange termes her eyes she doth inure,
That with one looke she doth my life dismay,
And with another doth it streight recure:
Her smile me drawes; her frowne me drives away.
  Thus doth she traine and teach me with her lookes;
  Such art of eyes I never read in bookes!

Smith:

    Being likewise scorned in love as well as I
      By that self-loving boy, which did disdain
      To hear her after him for love to cry,
      For which in dens obscure she doth remain;
    Yet doth she answer to each speech and voice,
      And renders back the last of what we speak,
      But specially, if she might have her choice,
      She of unkindness would her talk forth break.
    She loves to hear of love's most sacred name,
      Although, poor nymph, in love she was despised;
      And ever since she hides her head for shame,
      That her true meaning was so lightly prised;
    She pitying me, part of my woes doth bear,
    As you, good shepherds, listening now shall hear.

Griffin:

    Great is the joy that no tongue can express!
      Fair babe new born, how much dost thou delight me!
      But what, is mine so great? Yea, no whit less!
      So great that of all woes it doth acquite me.
    It's fair Fidessa that this comfort bringeth,
      Who sorry for the wrongs by her procured,
      Delightful tunes of love, of true love singeth,
      Wherewith her too chaste thoughts were ne'er inured.
    She loves, she saith, but with a love not blind.
      Her love is counsel that I should not love,
      But upon virtues fix a stayed mind.
      But what! This new-coined love, love doth reprove?
    If this be love of which you make such store,
    Sweet, love me less, that you may love me more!

Drayton:

    A witless gallant a young wench that wooed--
    Yet his dull spirit her not one jot could move--
    Intreated me as e'er I wished his good,
    To write him but one sonnet to his love.
      When I as fast as e'er my pen could trot,
    Poured out what first from quick invention came,
    Nor never stood one word thereof to blot;
    Much like his wit that was to use the same.
      But with my verses he his mistress won,
    Who doated on the dolt beyond all measure.
    But see, for you to heaven for phrase I run,
    And ransack all Apollo's golden treasure!
      Yet by my troth, this fool his love obtains,
      And I lose you for all my wit and pains!

Spenser:

This holy season, fit to fast and pray,
Men to devotion ought to be inclynd:
Therefore, I lykewise, on so holy day,
For my sweet saynt some service fit will find.
Her temple fayre is built within my mind,
In which her glorious ymage placed is;
On which my thoughts doo day and night attend,
Lyke sacred priests that never thinke amisse.
There I to her, as th'author of my blisse,
Will builde an altar to appease her yre;
And on the same my hart will sacrifise,
Burning in flames of pure and chaste desyre:
  The which vouchsafe, O Goddesse, to accept,
  Amongst thy deerest relicks to be kept.

Smith:

    The phoenix fair which rich Arabia breeds,
      When wasting time expires her tragedy,
      No more on Phoebus' radiant rays she feeds,
      But heapeth up great store of spicery;
    And on a lofty towering cedar tree,
      With heavenly substance she herself consumes,
      From whence she young again appears to be,
      Out of the cinders of her peerless plumes.
    So I which long have fried in love's flame,
      The fire not made of spice but sighs and tears,
      Revive again in hope disdain to shame,
      And put to flight the author of my fears.
    Her eyes revive decaying life in me,
    Though they augmenters of my thraldom be.

Griffin:

    He that will Caesar be, or else not be--
      Who can aspire to Caesar's bleeding fame,
      Must be of high resolve; but what is he
      That thinks to gain a second Caesar's name?
    Whoe'er he be that climbs above his strength,
      And climbeth high, the greater is his fall!
      For though he sit awhile, we see at length,
      His slippery place no firmness hath at all,
    Great is his bruise that falleth from on high.
      This warneth me that I should not aspire;
      Examples should prevail; I care not, I!
      I perish must or have what I desire!
    This humour doth with mine full well agree
    I must Fidessa's be, or else not be!

Drayton:

    With fools and children good discretion bears;
      Then, honest people, bear with love and me,
      Nor older yet nor wiser made by years,
    Amongst the rest of fools and children be.
      Love, still a baby, plays with gauds and toys,
    And like a wanton sports with every feather,
    And idiots still are running after boys;
    Then fools and children fitt'st to go together.
      He still as young as when he first was born,
    Nor wiser I than when as young as he;
    You that behold us, laugh us not to scorn;
    Give nature thanks you are not such as we!
      Yet fools and children sometimes tell in play;
      Some wise in show, more fools indeed than they.

Spenser:

Penelope, for her Ulisses sake,
Deviz'd a web her wooers to deceave;
In which the worke that she all day did make,
The same at night she did againe unreave.
Such subtile craft my damzell doth conceave,
Th'importune suit of my desire to shonne:
For all that I in many dayes do weave,
In one short houre I find by her undonne.
So when I thinke to end that I begonne,
I must begin and never bring to end:
For with one looke she spils that long I sponne,
And with one word my whole years work doth rend.
  Such labour like the spyders web I fynd,
  Whose fruitlesse worke is broken with least wynd.

Smith:

    Though they augmenters of my thraldom be,
      For her I live and her I love and none else;
      O then, fair eyes, look mildly upon me,
      Who poor, despised, forlorn must live alone else,
    And like Amintas haunt the desert cells,
      And moanless there breathe out thy cruelty,
      Where none but care and melancholy dwells.
      I for revenge to Nemesis will cry;
    If that will not prevail, my wandering ghost,
      Which breathless here this love-scorched trunk shall leave,
      Shall unto thee with tragic tidings post,
      How thy disdain did life from soul bereave.
    Then all too late my death thou wilt repent,
    When murther's guilt thy conscience shall torment.

Griffin:

    It was of love, ungentle gentle boy!
      That thou didst come and harbour in my breast;
      Not of intent my body to destroy,
      And have my soul, with restless cares opprest.
    But sith thy love doth turn unto my pain,
      Return to Greece, sweet lad, where thou wast born.
      Leave me alone my griefs to entertain,
      If thou forsake me, I am less forlorn;
    Although alone, yet shall I find more ease.
      Then see thou hie thee hence, or I will chase thee;
      Men highly wronged care not to displease;
      My fortune hangs on thee, thou dost disgrace me,
    Yet at thy farewell, play a friendly part;
    To make amends, fly to Fidessa's heart.

Drayton:

    Love, banished heaven, in earth was held in scorn,
    Wand'ring abroad in need and beggary;
    And wanting friends, though of a goddess born,
    Yet craved the alms of such as passed by.
      I, like a man devout and charitable,
    Clothed the naked, lodged this wandering guest;
    With sighs and tears still furnishing his table
    With what might make the miserable blest.
      But this ungrateful for my good desert,
    Enticed my thoughts against me to conspire,
    Who gave consent to steal away my heart,
    And set my breast, his lodging, on a fire.
      Well, well, my friends, when beggars grow thus bold,
      No marvel then though charity grow cold.

Spenser:

When I behold that beauties wonderment,
And rare perfection of each goodly part,
Of Natures skill the onely complement,
I honor and admire the Makers art.
But when I feele the bitter balefull smart
Which her fayre eyes unwares doe worke in mee,
That death out of theyr shiny beames doe dart,
I thinke that I a new Pandora see,
Whom all the gods in councell did agree
Into this sinfull world from heaven to send,
That she to wicked men a scourge should bee,
For all their faults with which they did offend.
  But since ye are my scourge, I will intreat
  That for my faults ye will me gently beat.

Smith:

    Who doth not know that love is triumphant,
      Sitting upon the throne of majesty?
      The gods themselves his cruel darts do daunt,
      And he, blind boy, smiles at their misery.
    Love made great Jove ofttimes transform his shape;
      Love made the fierce Alcides stoop at last;
      Achilles, stout and bold, could not escape
      The direful doom which love upon him cast;
    Love made Leander pass the dreadful flood
      Which Cestos from Abydos doth divide;
      Love made a chaos where proud Ilion stood,
      Through love the Carthaginian Dido died.
    Thus may we see how love doth rule and reigns,
    Bringing those under which his power disdains.

Griffin:

    Fly to her heart, hover about her heart,
    With dainty kisses mollify her heart,
    Pierce with thy arrows her obdurate heart,
    With sweet allurements ever move her heart,
    At midday and at midnight touch her heart,
    Be lurking closely, nestle about her heart,
    With power--thou art a god!--command her heart,
    Kindle thy coals of love about her heart,
    Yea, even into thyself transform her heart!
    Ah, she must love! Be sure thou have her heart;
    And I must die if thou have not her heart;
    Thy bed if thou rest well, must be her heart;
    He hath the best part sure that hath her heart;
    What have I not, if I have but her heart!

Drayton:

    I hear some say, "This man is not in love!"
    "Who! can he love? a likely thing!" they say.
    "Read but his verse, and it will easily prove!"
    O, judge not rashly, gentle Sir, I pray!
      Because I loosely trifle in this sort,
    As one that fain his sorrows would beguile,
    You now suppose me all this time in sport,
    And please yourself with this conceit the while.
      Ye shallow cens'rers! sometimes, see ye not,
    In greatest perils some men pleasant be,
    Where fame by death is only to be got,
    They resolute! So stands the case with me.
      Where other men in depth of passion cry,
      I laugh at fortune, as in jest to die.

Spenser:

How long shall this lyke-dying lyfe endure,
And know no end of her owne mysery,
But wast and weare away in termes unsure,
'Twixt feare and hope depending doubtfully!
Yet better were attonce to let me die,
And shew the last ensample of your pride,
Then to torment me thus with cruelty,
To prove your powre, which I too wel have tride.
But yet if in your hardned brest ye bide
A close intent at last to shew me grace,
Then all the woes and wrecks which I abide,
As meanes of blisse I gladly wil embrace;
  And wish that more and greater they might be,
  That greater meede at last may turne to mee.

Smith:

    Though you be fair and beautiful withal,
      And I am black for which you me despise,
      Know that your beauty subject is to fall,
      Though you esteem it at so high a price.
    And time may come when that whereof you boast,
      Which is your youth's chief wealth and ornament,
      Shall withered be by winter's raging frost,
      When beauty's pride and flowering years are spent.
    Then wilt thou mourn when none shall thee respect;
      Then wilt thou think how thou hast scorned my tears;
      Then pitiless each one will thee neglect,
      When hoary grey shall dye thy yellow hairs;
    Then wilt thou think upon poor Corin's case,
    Who loved thee dear, yet lived in thy disgrace.

Griffin:

    Striving is past! Ah, I must sink and drown,
      And that in sight of long descried shore!
      I cannot send for aid unto the town,
      All help is vain and I must die therefore.
    Then poor distressed caitiff, be resolved
      To leave this earthly dwelling fraught with care;
      Cease will thy woes, thy corpse in earth involved,
      Thou diest for her that will no help prepare.
    O see, my case herself doth now behold;
      The casement open is; she seems to speak;--
      But she has gone! O then I dare be bold
      And needs must say she caused my heart to break.
    I die before I drown, O heavy case!
    It was because I saw my mistress' face.

Drayton:

    O, why should nature niggardly restrain
    That foreign nations relish not our tongue?
    Else should my lines glide on the waves of Rhine,
    And crown the Pyren's with my living song.
      But bounded thus, to Scotland get you forth!
    Thence take you wing unto the Orcades!
    There let my verse get glory in the north,
    Making my sighs to thaw the frozen seas.
      And let the bards within that Irish isle,
    To whom my Muse with fiery wings shall pass,
    Call back the stiff-necked rebels from exile,
    And mollify the slaughtering gallowglass;
      And when my flowing numbers they rehearse,
      Let wolves and bears be charmed with my verse.

Spenser:

Sweet is the rose, but growes upon a brere;
Sweet is the iunipeer; but sharpe his bough;
Sweet is the eglantine, but pricketh nere;
Sweet is the firbloome, but his braunches rough;
Sweet is the cypresse, but his rynd is rough;
Sweet is the nut, but bitter is his pill;
Sweet is the broome-flowre, but yet sowre enough;
And sweet is moly, but his root is ill.
So every sweet with soure is tempred still,
That maketh it be coveted the more:
For easie things, that may be got at will,
Most sorts of men doe set but little store.
  Why then should I accompt of little paine,
  That endlesse pleasure shall unto me gaine!

Smith:

    What cruel star or fate had domination
      When I was born, that thus my love is crossed?
      Or from what planet had I derivation
      That thus my life in seas of woe is crossed?
    Doth any live that ever had such hap
      That all their actions are of none effect,
      Whom fortune never dandled in her lap
      But as an abject still doth me reject?
    Ah tickle dame! and yet thou constant art
      My daily grief and anguish to increase,
      And to augment the troubles of my heart
      Thou of these bonds wilt never me release;
    So that thy darlings me to be may know
    The true idea of all worldly woe.

Griffin:

    Compare me to Pygmalion with his image sotted,
      For, as was he, even so am I deceived.
      The shadow only is to me allotted,
      The substance hath of substance me bereaved.
    Then poor and helpless must I wander still
      In deep laments to pass succeeding days,
      Welt'ring in woes that poor and mighty kill.
      O who is mighty that so soon decays!
    The dread Almighty hath appointed so
      The final period of all worldly things.
      Then as in time they come, so must they go;
      Death common is to beggars and to kings
    For whither do I run beside my text?
    I run to death, for death must be the next.

Drayton:

    I ever love where never hope appears,
      Yet hope draws on my never-hoping care,
      And my life's hope would die but for despair;
    My never certain joy breeds ever certain fears.
    Uncertain dread gives wings unto my hope;
      Yet my hope's wings are laden so with fear
      As they cannot ascend to my hope's sphere,
    Though fear gives them more than a heavenly scope.
    Yet this large room is bounded with despair,
      So my love is still fettered with vain hope,
      And liberty deprives him of his scope,
    And thus am I imprisoned in the air.
      Then, sweet despair, awhile hold up thy head,
      Or all my hope for sorrow will be dead.

Spenser:

Faire Proud! now tell me, why should faire be proud,
Sith all worlds glorie is but drosse uncleane,
And in the shade of death it selfe shall shroud,
However now thereof ye little weene!
That goodly idoll, now so gay beseene,
Shall doffe her fleshes borrowd fayre attyre,
And be forgot as it had never beene,
That many now much worship and admire!
Ne any then shall after it inquire,
Ne any mention shall thereof remaine,
But what this verse, that never shall expyre,
Shall to you purchas with her thankles pain!
  Faire! be no lenger proud of that shall perish,
  But that which shall you make immortall cherish.

Smith:

    Some in their hearts their mistress' colours bears;
      Some hath her gloves, some other hath her garters,
      Some in a bracelet wears her golden hairs,
      And some with kisses seal their loving charters.
    But I which never favour reaped yet,
      Nor had one pleasant look from her fair brow,
      Content myself in silent shade to sit
      In hope at length my cares to overplow.
    Meanwhile mine eyes shall feed on her fair face,
      My sighs shall tell to her my sad designs,
      My painful pen shall ever sue for grace
      To help my heart, which languishing now pines;
    And I will triumph still amidst my woe
    Till mercy shall my sorrows overflow.

Griffin:

    The silly bird that hastes unto the net,
      And flutters to and fro till she be taken,
      Doth look some food or succour there to get,
      But loseth life, so much is she mistaken.
    The foolish fly that fleeth to the flame
      With ceaseless hovering and with restless flight,
      Is burned straight to ashes in the same,
      And finds her death where was her most delight
    The proud aspiring boy that needs would pry
      Into the secrets of the highest seat,
      Had some conceit to gain content thereby,
      Or else his folly sure was wondrous great.
    These did through folly perish all and die:
    And though I know it, even so do I.

Drayton:

    Is not love here as 'tis in other climes,
    And differeth it as do the several nations?
    Or hath it lost the virtue with the times,
    Or in this island alt'reth with the fashions?
      Or have our passions lesser power than theirs,
    Who had less art them lively to express?
    Is nature grown less powerful in their heirs,
    Or in our fathers did she more transgress?
      I am sure my sighs come from a heart as true
    As any man's that memory can boast,
    And my respects and services to you,
    Equal with his that loves his mistress most.
      Or nature must be partial in my cause,
      Or only you do violate her laws.

Spenser:

The laurel-leafe which you this day doe weare
Gives me great hope of your relenting mynd:
For since it is the badge which I doe beare,
Ye, bearing it, doe seeme to me inclind.
The powre thereof, which ofte in me I find,
Let it likewise your gentle brest inspire
With sweet infusion, and put you in mind
Of that proud mayd whom now those leaves attyre:
Proud Daphne, scorning Phrebus lovely fyre,
On the Thessalian shore from him did flie;
For which the gods, in theyr revengefull yre,
Did her transforme into a laurell-tree.
  Then fly no more, fayre Love, from Phebus chace,
  But in your brest his leafe and love embrace.

Smith:

    The raging sea within his limits lies
      And with an ebb his flowing doth discharge;
      The rivers when beyond their bounds they rise,
      Themselves do empty in the ocean large;
    But my love's sea which never limit keepeth,
      Which never ebbs but always ever floweth,
      In liquid salt unto my Chloris weepeth,
      Yet frustrate are the tears which he bestoweth.
    This sea which first was but a little spring
      Is now so great and far beyond all reason,
      That it a deluge to my thoughts doth bring,
      Which overwhelmed hath my joying season.
    So hard and dry is my saint's cruel mind,
    These waves no way in her to sink can find.

Griffin:

    Poor worm, poor silly worm, alas, poor beast!
      Fear makes thee hide thy head within the ground,
      Because of creeping things thou art the least,
      Yet every foot gives thee thy mortal wound.
    But I, thy fellow worm, am in worse state,
      For thou thy sun enjoyest, but I want mine.
      I live in irksome night, O cruel fate!
      My sun will never rise, nor ever shine.
    Thus blind of light, mine eyes misguide my feet,
      And baleful darkness makes me still afraid;
      Men mock me when I stumble in the street,
      And wonder how my young sight so decayed.
    Yet do I joy in this, even when I fall,
    That I shall see again and then see all.

Drayton:

    To such as say thy love I overprize,
    And do not stick to term my praises folly,
    Against these folks that think themselves so wise,
    I thus oppose my reason's forces wholly:
      Though I give more than well affords my state,
    In which expense the most suppose me vain
    Which yields them nothing at the easiest rate,
    Yet at this price returns me treble gain;
      They value not, unskilful how to use,
    And I give much because I gain thereby.
    I that thus take or they that thus refuse,
    Whether are these deceived then, or I?
      In everything I hold this maxim still,
      The circumstance doth make it good or ill.

Spenser:

See! how the stubborne damzell doth deprave
My simple meaning with disdaynfull scorne,
And by the bay which I unto her gave
Accoumpts my self her captive quite forlorne.
The bay, quoth she, is of the victours born,
Yielded them by the vanquisht as theyr meeds,
And they therewith doe poetes heads adorne,
To sing the glory of their famous deeds.
But sith she will the conquest challeng needs,
Let her accept me as her faithfull thrall;
That her great triumph, which my skill exceeds,
I may in trump of fame blaze over all.
  Then would I decke her head with glorious bayes,
  And fill the world with her victorious prayse.

Smith:

    These waves no way in her to sink can find
      To penetrate the pith of contemplation;
      These tears cannot dissolve her hardened mind,
      Nor move her heart on me to take compassion;
    O then, poor Corin, scorned and quite despised,
      Loathe now to live since life procures thy woe;
      Enough, thou hast thy heart anatomised,
      For her sweet sake which will no pity show;
    But as cold winter's storms and nipping frost
      Can never change sweet Aramanthus' hue,
      So though my love and life by her are crossed.
      My heart shall still be constant firm and true.
    Although Erynnis hinders Hymen's rites,
    My fixed faith against oblivion fights.

Griffin:

    Well may my soul, immortal and divine,
      That is imprisoned in a lump of clay,
      Breathe out laments until this body pine,
      That from her takes her pleasures all away.
    Pine then, thou loathed prison of my life,
      Untoward subject of the least aggrievance!
      O let me die! Mortality is rife;
      Death comes by wounds, by sickness, care, and chance.
    O earth, the time will come when I'll resume thee,
      And in thy bosom make my resting-place;
      Then do not unto hardest sentence doom me;
      Yield, yield betimes; I must and will have grace!
    Richly shalt thou be entombed, since, for thy grave,
    Fidessa, fair Fidessa, thou shalt have!

Drayton:

    When conquering love did first my heart assail,
    Unto mine aid I summoned every sense,
    Doubting if that proud tyrant should prevail,
    My heart should suffer for mine eyes' offence.
      But he with beauty first corrupted sight,
    My hearing bribed with her tongue's harmony,
    My taste by her sweet lips drawn with delight,
    My smelling won with her breath's spicery,
      But when my touching came to play his part,
    The king of senses, greater than the rest,
    He yields love up the keys unto my heart,
    And tells the others how they should be blest.
      And thus by those of whom I hoped for aid,
      To cruel love my soul was first betrayed.

Spenser:

My Love is lyke to yse, and I to fyre:
How comes it then that this her cold so great
Is not dissolv'd through my so hot desyre,
But harder growes the more I her intreat?
Or how comes it that my exceeding heat
Is not delayd by her hart-frosen cold,
But that I burne much more in boyling sweat,
And feele my flames augmented manifold?
What more miraculous thing may be told,
That fire, which all things melts, should harden yse,
And yse, which is congeald with sencelesse cold,
Should kindle fyre by wonderful devyse?
  Such is the powre of love in gentle mind,
  That it can alter all the course of kynd.

Smith:

    My fixed faith against oblivion fights,
      And I cannot forget her, pretty elf,
      Although she cruel be unto my plights;
      Yet let me rather clean forget myself,
    Then her sweet name out of my mind should go,
      Which is th' elixir of my pining soul,
      From whence the essence of my life doth flow,
      Whose beauty rare my senses all control;
    Themselves most happy evermore accounting,
      That such a nymph is queen of their affection,
      With ravished rage they to the skies are mounting,
      Esteeming not their thraldom nor subjection;
    But still do joy amidst their misery,
    With patience bearing love's captivity.

Griffin:

    Earth, take this earth wherein my spirits languish;
      Spirits, leave this earth that doth in griefs retain you;
      Griefs, chase this earth that it may fade with anguish;
      Spirits, avoid these furies which do pain you!
    O leave your loathsome prison; freedom gain you;
      Your essence is divine; great is your power;
      And yet you moan your wrongs and sore complain you,
      Hoping for joy which fadeth every hour.
    O spirits, your prison loathe and freedom gain you;
      The destinies in deep laments have shut you
      Of mortal hate, because they do disdain you,
      And yet of joy that they in prison put you.
    Earth, take this earth with thee to be enclosed;
    Life is to me, and I to it, opposed!

Drayton:

    Those priests which first the vestal fire begun,
    Which might be borrowed from no earthly flame,
    Devised a vessel to receive the sun,
    Being stedfastly opposed to the same;
      Where with sweet wood laid curiously by art,
    On which the sun might by reflection beat,
    Receiving strength for every secret part,
    The fuel kindled with celestial heat.
      Thy blessed eyes, the sun which lights this fire,
    My holy thoughts, they be the vestal flame,
    Thy precious odours be my chaste desires,
    My breast's the vessel which includes the same;
      Thou art my Vesta, thou my goddess art,
      Thy hallowed temple only is my heart.

Spenser:

Ah! why hath Nature to so hard a hart
Given so goodly giftes of beauties grace,
Whose pryde depraves each other better part,
And all those pretious ornaments deface?
Sith to all other beastes of bloody race
A dreadfull countenance she given hath,
That with theyr terrour all the rest may chace,
And warne to shun the daunger of theyr wrath.
But my proud one doth worke the greater scath,
Through sweet allurement of her lovely hew,
That she the better may in bloody bath
Of such poore thralls her cruell hands embrew.
  But did she know how ill these two accord,
  Such cruelty she would have soone abhord.

Smith:

    With patience bearing love's captivity,
      Themselves unguilty of his wrath alleging;
      These homely lines, abjects of poesy,
      For liberty and for their ransom pledging,
    And being free they solemnly do vow,
      Under his banner ever arms to bear
      Against those rebels which do disallow
      That love of bliss should be the sovereign heir;
    And Chloris if these weeping truce-men may
      One spark of pity from thine eyes obtain,
      In recompense of their sad heavy lay,
      Poor Corin shall thy faithful friend remain;
    And what I say I ever will approve,
    No joy may be compared to thy love!

Griffin:

    Weep now no more, mine eyes, but be you drowned
      In your own tears, so many years distilled.
      And let her know that at them long hath frowned,
      That you can weep no more although she willed;
    This hap her cruelty hath her allotten,
       Who whilom was commandress of each part;
       That now her proper griefs must be forgotten
       By those true outward signs of inward smart.
    For how can he that hath not one tear left him,
       Stream out those floods that are due unto her moaning,
       When both of eyes and tears she hath bereft him?
       O yet I'll signify my grief with groaning;
    True sighs, true groans shall echo in the air
    And say, Fidessa, though most cruel, is most fair!

Drayton:

    Methinks I see some crooked mimic jeer,
    And tax my Muse with this fantastic grace;
    Turning my papers asks, "What have we here?"
    Making withal some filthy antic face.
      I fear no censure nor what thou canst say,
    Nor shall my spirit one jot of vigour lose.
    Think'st thou, my wit shall keep the packhorse way,
    That every dudgeon low invention goes?
      Since sonnets thus in bundles are imprest,
    And every drudge doth dull our satiate ear,
    Think'st thou my love shall in those rags be drest
    That every dowdy, every trull doth wear?
      Up to my pitch no common judgment flies;
      I scorn all earthly dung-bred scarabies.

Spenser:

The paynefull smith with force of fervent heat
The hardest yron soone doth mollify,
That with his heavy sledge he can it beat,
And fashion to what he it list apply.
Yet cannot all these flames in which I fry
Her hart, more hard then yron, soft a whit,
Ne all the playnts and prayers with which I
Doe beat on th'andvile of her stubberne wit:
But still, the more she fervent sees my fit,
The more she frieseth in her wilfull pryde,
And harder growes, the harder she is smit
With all the playnts which to her be applyde.
  What then remaines but I to ashes burne,
  And she to stones at length all frosen turne!

Smith:

    The bird of Thrace which doth bewail her rape,
      And murthered Itys eaten by his sire,
      When she her woes in doleful tunes doth shape,
      She sets her breast against a thorny briar;
    Because care-charmer sleep should not disturb
      The tragic tale which to the night she tells,
      She doth her rest and quietness thus curb
      Amongst the groves where secret silence dwells:
    Even so I wake, and waking wail all night;
      Chloris' unkindness slumbers doth expel;
      I need not thorn's sweet sleep to put to flight,
      Her cruelty my golden rest doth quell,
    That day and night to me are always one,
    Consumed in woe, in tears, in sighs and moan.

Griffin:

    Tongue, never cease to sing Fidessa's praise;
      Heart, however she deserve conceive the best;
      Eyes, stand amazed to see her beauty's rays;
      Lips, steal one kiss and be for ever blest;
    Hands, touch that hand wherein your life is closed;
      Breast, lock up fast in thee thy life's sole treasure;
      Arms, still embrace and never be disclosed;
      Feet, run to her without or pace or measure;
    Tongue, heart, eyes, lips, hands, breast, arms, feet,
      Consent to do true homage to your Queen,
      Lovely, fair, gentle, wise, virtuous, sober, sweet,
      Whose like shall never be, hath never been!
    O that I were all tongue, her praise to shew;
    Then surely my poor heart were freed from woe!

Drayton:

    Our floods' queen, Thames, for ships and swans is crowned,
    And stately Severn for her shore is praised;
    The crystal Trent for fords and fish renowned,
    And Avon's fame to Albion's cliff is raised.
      Carlegion Chester vaunts her holy Dee;
    York many wonders of her Ouse can tell;
    The Peak, her Dove, whose banks so fertile be;
    And Kent will say her Medway doth excel.
      Cotswold commends her Isis to the Thame;
    Our northern borders boast of Tweed's fair flood;
    Our western parts extol their Wilis' fame;
    And the old Lea brags of the Danish blood.
      Arden's sweet Ankor, let thy glory be,
      That fair Idea only lives by thee!

Spenser:

Great wrong I doe, I can it not deny,
To that most sacred empresse, my dear dred,
Not finishing her Queene of Faery,
That mote enlarge her living prayses, dead.
But Lodwick, this of grace to me aread:
Do ye not thinck th'accomplishment of it
Sufficient worke for one mans simple head,
All were it, as the rest, but rudely writ?
How then should I, without another wit,
Thinck ever to endure so tedious toyle,
Sith that this one is tost with troublous fit
Of a proud Love, that doth my spirite spoyle?
  Cease, then, till she vouchsafe to grawnt me rest,
  Or lend you me another living brest.

Smith:

    Like to the shipman in his brittle boat.
      Tossed aloft by the unconstant wind,
      By dangerous rocks and whirling gulfs doth float,
      Hoping at length the wished port to find;
    So doth my love in stormy billows sail,
      And passeth the gaping Scilla's waves,
      In hope at length with Chloris to prevail
      And win that prize which most my fancy craves,
    Which unto me of value will be more
      Then was that rich and wealthy golden fleece.
      Which Jason stout from Colchos' island bore
      With wind in sails unto the shore of Greece.
    More rich, more rare, more worth her love I prize
    Then all the wealth which under heaven lies.

Griffin:

    Sore sick of late, nature her due would have,
      Great was my pain where still my mind did rest;
      No hope but heaven, no comfort but my grave,
      Which is of comforts both the last and least;
    But on a sudden, the Almighty sent
      Sweet ease to the distressed and comfortless,
      And gave me longer time for to repent,
      With health and strength the foes of feebleness;
    Yet I my health no sooner 'gan recover,
      But my old thoughts, though full of cares, retained,
      Made me, as erst, become a wretched lover
      Of her that love and lovers aye disdained.
    Then was my pain with ease of pain increased,
    And I ne'er sick until my sickness ceased.

Drayton:

    Whilst yet mine eyes do surfeit with delight,
    My woful heart imprisoned in my breast,
    Wisheth to be transformed to my sight,
    That it like those by looking might be blest.
      But whilst mine eyes thus greedily do gaze,
    Finding their objects over-soon depart,
    These now the other's happiness do praise,
    Wishing themselves that they had been my heart,
      That eyes were heart, or that the heart were eyes,
    As covetous the other's use to have.
    But finding nature their request denies,
    This to each other mutually they crave;
      That since the one cannot the other be,
      That eyes could think of that my heart could see.

Spenser:

Lyke as a ship, that through the ocean wyde
By conduct of some star doth make her way,
Whenas a storm hath dimd her trusty guyde,
Out of her course doth wander far astray,
So I, whose star, that wont with her bright ray
Me to direct, with cloudes is over-cast,
Doe wander now in darknesse and dismay,
Through hidden perils round about me plast.
Yet hope I well that, when this storme is past,
My Helice, the lodestar of ray lyfe,
Will shine again, and looke on me at last,
With lovely light to cleare my cloudy grief.
  Till then I wander carefull, comfortlesse,
  In secret sorrow and sad pensivenesse.

Smith:

    O what a wound and what a deadly stroke,
      Doth Cupid give to us perplexed lovers,
      Which cleaves more fast then ivy doth to oak,
      Unto our hearts where he his might discovers!
    Though warlike Mars were armed at all points,
      With that tried coat which fiery Vulcan made,
      Love's shafts did penetrate his steeled joints,
      And in his breast in streaming gore did wade.
    So pitiless is this fell conqueror
      That in his mother's paps his arrows stuck;
      Such is his rage that he doth not defer
      To wound those orbs from whence he life did suck.
    Then sith no mercy he shows to his mother,
    We meekly must his force and rigour smother.

Griffin:

    He that would fain Fidessa's image see,
      My face of force may be his looking-glass.
      There is she portrayed and her cruelty,
      Which as a wonder through the world must pass.
    But were I dead, she would not be betrayed;
      It's I, that 'gainst my will, shall make it known.
      Her cruelty by me must be bewrayed,
      Or I must hide my head and live alone.
    I'll pluck my silver hairs from out my head,
      And wash away the wrinkles of my face;
      Closely immured I'll live as I were dead,
      Before she suffer but the least disgrace.
    How can I hide that is already known?
    I have been seen and have no face but one.

Drayton:

    Marvel not, love, though I thy power admire,
      Ravished a world beyond the farthest thought,
      And knowing more than ever hath been taught,
    That I am only starved in my desire.
    Marvel not, love, though I thy power admire,
      Aiming at things exceeding all perfection,
      To wisdom's self to minister direction,
    That I am only starved in my desire.
    Marvel not, love, though I thy power admire,
      Though my conceit I further seem to bend
      Than possibly invention can extend,
    And yet am only starved in my desire.
      If thou wilt wonder, here's the wonder, love,
      That this to me doth yet no wonder prove.

Spenser:

My hungry eyes, through greedy covetize
Still to behold the obiect of their paine,
With no contentment can themselves suffize;
But having, pine, and having not, complaine.
For lacking it, they cannot lyfe sustayne;
And having it, they gaze on it the more,
In their amazement lyke Narcissus vaine,
Whose eyes him starv'd: so plenty makes me poore.
Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store
Of that faire sight, that nothing else they brooke,
But lothe the things which they did like before,
And can no more endure on them to looke.
  All this worlds glory seemeth vayne to me,
  And all their showes but shadowes, saving she.

Smith:

    Each beast in field doth wish the morning light;
      The birds to Hesper pleasant lays do sing;
      The wanton kids well-fed rejoice in night,
      Being likewise glad when day begins to spring.
    But night nor day are welcome unto me,
      Both can bear witness of my lamentation;
      All day sad sighing Corin you shall see,
      All night he spends in tears and exclamation.
    Thus still I live although I take no rest,
      But living look as one that is a-dying;
      Thus my sad soul with care and grief oppressed,
      Seems as a ghost to Styx and Lethe flying.
    Thus hath fond love bereft my youthful years
    Of all good hap before old age appears.

Griffin:

    Fie pleasure, fie! Thou cloy'st me with delight;
      Sweet thoughts, you kill me if you lower stray!
      O many be the joys of one short night!
      Tush, fancies never can desire allay!
    Happy, unhappy thoughts! I think, and have not.
      Pleasure, O pleasing pain! Shows nought avail me!
      Mine own conceit doth glad me, more I crave not;
      Yet wanting substance, woe doth still assail me.
    Babies do children please, and shadows fools;
      Shows have deceived the wisest many a time.
      Ever to want our wish, our courage cools.
      The ladder broken, 'tis in vain to climb.
    But I must wish, and crave, and seek, and climb;
    It's hard if I obtain not grace in time.

Drayton:

    Some misbelieving and profane in love,
      When I do speak of miracles by thee,
      May say that thou art flattered by me,
    Who only write my skill in verse to prove
    See miracles, ye unbelieving, see!
      A dumb-born Muse made to express the mind,
      A cripple hand to write, yet lame by kind,
    One by thy name, the other touching thee.
    Blind were mine eyes, till they were seen of thine;
      And mine ears deaf by thy fame healed be;
      My vices cured by virtues sprung from thee;
    My hopes revived which long in grave had lien.
      All unclean thoughts, foul spirits, cast out in me,
      Only by virtue that proceeds from thee.

Spenser:

Tell me, when shall these wearie woes have end;
Or shall their ruthlesse torment never cease,
But al my days in pining languor spend,
Without hope of asswagement or release?
Is there no meanes for me to purchace peace,
Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes;
But that their cruelty doth still increace,
And dayly more augment my miseryes?
But when ye have shew'd all extremityes,
Then think how little glory ye have gayned
By slaying him, whose lyfe, though ye despyse,
Mote have your life in honor long maintayned.
  But by his death, which some perhaps will mone,
  Ye shall condemned be of many a one.

Smith:

    That day wherein mine eyes cannot her see,
      Which is the essence of their crystal sight,
      Both blind, obscure and dim that day they be,
      And are debarred of fair heaven's light;
    That day wherein mine ears do want to hear her,
      Hearing that day is from me quite bereft;
      That day wherein to touch I come not near her,
      That day no sense of touching I have left;
    That day wherein I lack the fragrant smell,
      Which from her pleasant amber breath proceedeth,
      Smelling that day disdains with me to dwell,
      Only weak hope my pining carcase feedeth.
    But burst, poor heart, thou hast no better hope,
    Since all thy senses have no further scope!

Griffin:

    I have not spent the April of my time,
      The sweet of youth in plotting in the air,
      But do at first adventure seek to climb,
      Whilst flowers of blooming years are green and fair.
    I am no leaving of all-withering age,
      I have not suffered many winter lours;
      I feel no storm unless my love do rage,
      And then in grief I spend both days and hours.
    This yet doth comfort that my flower lasted
      Until it did approach my sun too near;
      And then, alas, untimely was it blasted,
      So soon as once thy beauty did appear!
    But after all, my comfort rests in this,
    That for thy sake my youth decayed is.

Drayton:

    Thou purblind boy, since thou hast been so slack
    To wound her heart whose eyes have wounded me
    And suffered her to glory in my wrack,
    Thus to my aid I lastly conjure thee!
      By hellish Styx, by which the Thund'rer swears,
    By thy fair mother's unavoided power,
    By Hecate's names, by Proserpine's sad tears,
    When she was wrapt to the infernal bower!
      By thine own loved Psyche, by the fires
    Spent on thine altars flaming up to heaven,
    By all true lovers' sighs, vows, and desires,
    By all the wounds that ever thou hast given;
      I conjure thee by all that I have named,
      To make her love, or, Cupid, be thou damned!

Spenser:

What guyle is this, that those her golden tresses
She doth attyre under a net of gold,
And with sly skill so cunningly them dresses,
That which is gold or haire may scarse be told?
Is it that mens frayle eyes, which gaze too bold,
She may entangle in that golden snare;
And, being caught, may craftily enfold
Their weaker harts, which are not wel aware?
Take heed therefore, myne eyes, how ye doe stare
Henceforth too rashly on that guilefull net,
In which if ever ye entrapped are,
Out of her bands ye by no meanes shall get.
  Fondnesse it were for any, being free,
  To covet fetters, though they golden bee!

Smith:

    The stately lion and the furious bear
      The skill of man doth alter from their kind;
      For where before they wild and savage were,
      By art both tame and meek you shall them find.
    The elephant although a mighty beast,
      A man may rule according to his skill;
      The lusty horse obeyeth our behest,
      For with the curb you may him guide at will.
    Although the flint most hard contains the fire,
      By force we do his virtue soon obtain,
      For with a steel you shall have your desire,
      Thus man may all things by industry gain;
    Only a woman if she list not love,
    No art, nor force, can unto pity move.

Griffin:

    O let my heart, my body, and my tongue
      Bleed forth the lively streams of faith unfeigned,
      Worship my saint the gods and saints among,
      Praise and extol her fair that me hath pained!
    O let the smoke of my suppressed desire,
      Raked up in ashes of my burning breast,
      Break out at length and to the clouds aspire,
      Urging the heavens to afford me rest;
    But let my body naturally descend
      Into the bowels of our common mother,
      And to the very centre let it wend,
      When it no lower can, her griefs to smother!
    And yet when I so low do buried lie,
    Then shall my love ascend unto the sky.

Drayton:

    Dear, why should you command me to my rest,
    When now the night doth summon all to sleep?
    Methinks this time becometh lovers best;
    Night was ordained together friends to keep.
      How happy are all other living things,
    Which though the day disjoin by several flight,
    The quiet evening yet together brings,
    And each returns unto his love at night!
      O thou that art so courteous else to all,
    Why shouldst thou, Night, abuse me only thus,
    That every creature to his kind dost call,
    And yet 'tis thou dost only sever us?
      Well could I wish it would be ever day,
      If when night comes, you bid me go away.

Spenser:

Arion, when, through tempests cruel wracke,
He forth was thrown into the greedy seas,
Through the sweet musick which his harp did make
Allur'd a dolphin him from death to ease.
But my rude musick, which was wont to please
Some dainty eares, cannot, with any skill,
The dreadfull tempest of her wrath appease,
Nor move the dolphin from her stubborn will.
But in her pride she dooth persever still,
All carelesse how my life for her decayes:
Yet with one word she can it save or spill.
To spill were pitty, but to save were prayse!
  Chuse rather to be praysd for doing good,
  Then to be blam'd for spilling guiltlesse blood.

Smith:

    No art nor force can unto pity move
      Her stony heart that makes my heart to pant;
      No pleading passions of my extreme love
      Can mollify her mind of adamant.
    Ah cruel sex, and foe to all mankind,
      Either you love or else you hate too much!
      A glist'ring show of gold in you we find,
      And yet you prove but copper in the touch.
    But why, O why, do I so far digress?
      Nature you made of pure and fairest mould,
      The pomp and glory of man to depress,
      And as your slaves in thraldom them to hold;
    Which by experience now too well I prove,
    There is no pain unto the pains of love.

Griffin:

    Fair is my love that feeds among the lilies,
      The lilies growing in that pleasant garden
      Where Cupid's mount, that well beloved hill is,
      And where that little god himself is warden.
    See where my love sits in the beds of spices,
      Beset all round with camphor, myrrh, and roses,
      And interlaced with curious devices,
      Which her from all the world apart incloses.
    There doth she tune her lute for her delight,
      And with sweet music makes the ground to move;
      Whilst I, poor I, do sit in heavy plight,
      Wailing alone my unrespected love,
    Not daring rush into so rare a place,
    That gives to her, and she to it, a grace.

Drayton:

    Sitting alone, love bids me go and write;
      Reason plucks back, commanding me to stay,
      Boasting that she doth still direct the way,
    Or else love were unable to indite.
    Love growing angry, vexed at the spleen,
      And scorning reason's maimed argument,
      Straight taxeth reason, wanting to invent
    Where she with love conversing hath not been.
    Reason reproached with this coy disdain,
      Despiteth love, and laugheth at her folly;
      And love contemning reason's reason wholly,
    Thought it in weight too light by many a grain.
      Reason put back doth out of sight remove,
      And love alone picks reason out of love.

Spenser:

Sweet smile! the daughter of the Queene of Love,
Expressing all thy mothers powrefull art,
With which she wonts to temper angry Iove,
When all the gods he threats with thundring dart,
Sweet is thy vertue, as thy selfe sweet art.
For when on me thou shinedst late in sadnesse,
A melting pleasance ran through every part,
And me revived with hart-robbing gladnesse;
Whylest rapt with ioy resembling heavenly madness,
My soule was ravisht quite as in a traunce,
And, feeling thence no more her sorrowes sadnesse,
Fed on the fulnesse of that chearfull glaunce.
  More sweet than nectar, or ambrosiall meat,
  Seem'd every bit which thenceforth I did eat.

Smith:

    Fair shepherdess, when as these rustic lines
      Comes to thy sight, weigh but with what affection
      Thy servile doth depaint his sad designs,
      Which to redress of thee he makes election.
    If so you scorn, you kill; if you seem coy,
      You wound poor Corin to the very heart;
      If that you smile, you shall increase his joy;
      If these you like, you banish do all smart.
    And this I do protest, most fairest fair,
      My muse shall never cease that hill to climb,
      To which the learned Muses do repair,
      And all to deify thy name in rime;
    And never none shall write with truer mind,
    As by all proof and trial you shall find.

Griffin:

    Was never eye did see my mistress' face,
      Was never ear did hear Fidessa's tongue,
      Was never mind that once did mind her grace,
      That ever thought the travail to be long.
    When her I see, no creature I behold,
      So plainly say these advocates of love,
      That now do fear and now to speak are bold,
      Trembling apace when they resolve to prove.
    These strange effects do show a hidden power,
      A majesty all base attempts reproving,
      That glads or daunts as she doth laugh or lower;
      Surely some goddess harbours in their moving
    Who thus my Muse from base attempts hath raised,
    Whom thus my Muse beyond compare hath praised.

Drayton:

    Some, when in rhyme they of their loves do tell,
    With flames and lightnings their exordiums paint.
    Some call on heaven, some invocate on hell,
    And Fates and Furies, with their woes acquaint.
      Elizium is too high a seat for me,
    I will not come in Styx or Phlegethon,
    The thrice-three Muses but too wanton be,
    Like they that lust, I care not, I will none.
      Spiteful Erinnys frights me with her looks,
    My manhood dares not with foul Ate mell,
    I quake to look on Hecate's charming books,
    I still fear bugbears in Apollo's cell.
      I pass not for Minerva, nor Astrea,
      Only I call on my divine Idea!

Spenser:

Mark when she smiles with amiable cheare,
And tell me whereto can ye lyken it;
When on each eyelid sweetly doe appeare
An hundred Graces as in shade to sit.
Lykest it seemeth, in my simple wit,
Unto the fayre sunshine in somers day,
That, when a dreadfull storme away is flit,
Thrugh the broad world doth spred his goodly ray
At sight whereof, each bird that sits on spray.
And every beast that to his den was fled,
Comes forth afresh out of their late dismay,
And to the light lift up their drouping hed.
  So my storme-beaten hart likewise is cheared
  With that sunshine, when cloudy looks are cleared.

Smith:

    Die, die, my hopes! for you do but augment
      The burning accents of my deep despair;
      Disdain and scorn your downfall do consent;
      Tell to the world she is unkind yet fair!
    O eyes, close up those ever-running fountains,
      For pitiless are all the tears you shed
      Wherewith you watered have both dales and mountains!
      I see, I see, remorse from her is fled.
    Pack hence, ye sighs, into the empty air,
      Into the air that none your sound may hear,
      Sith cruel Chloris hath of you no care,
      Although she once esteemed you full dear!
    Let sable night all your disgraces cover,
    Yet truer sighs were never sighed by lover.

Griffin:

    My lady's hair is threads of beaten gold,
      Her front the purest crystal eye hath seen,
      Her eyes the brightest stars the heavens hold,
      Her cheeks red roses such as seld have been;
    Her pretty lips of red vermillion die,
      Her hand of ivory the purest white,
      Her blush Aurora or the morning sky,
      Her breast displays two silver fountains bright
    The spheres her voice, her grace the Graces three:
      Her body is the saint that I adore;
      Her smiles and favours sweet as honey be;
      Her feet fair Thetis praiseth evermore.
    But ah, the worst and last is yet behind,
    For of a griffon she doth bear the mind!

Drayton:

    My heart the anvil where my thoughts do beat,
    My words the hammers fashioning my desire,
    My breast the forge including all the heat,
    Love is the fuel which maintains the fire;
      My sighs the bellows which the flame increaseth,
    Filling mine ears with noise and nightly groaning;
    Toiling with pain, my labour never ceaseth,
    In grievous passions my woes still bemoaning;
      My eyes with tears against the fire striving,
    Whose scorching gleed my heart to cinders turneth;
    But with those drops the flame again reviving,
    Still more and more it to my torment burneth,
      With Sisyphus thus do I roll the stone,
      And turn the wheel with damned Ixion.

Spenser:

Is it her nature, or is it her will,
To be so cruell to an humbled foe?
If nature, then she may it mend with skill;
If will, then she at will may will forgoe.
But if her nature and her will be so,
That she will plague the man that loves her most,
And take delight t'encrease a wretches woe,
Then all her natures goodly guifts are lost;
And that same glorious beauties ydle boast
Is but a bayt such wretches to beguile,
As, being long in her loves tempest tost,
She meanes at last to make her pitious spoyle.
  O fayrest fayre! let never it be named,
  That so fayre beauty was so fowly shamed.

Smith:

    Thou glorious sun, from whence my lesser light
      The substance of his crystal shine doth borrow,
      Let these my moans find favour in thy sight.
      And with remorse extinguish now my sorrow!
    Renew those lamps which thy disdain hath quenched,
      As Phoebus doth his sister Phoebe's shine;
      Consider how thy Corin being drenched
      In seas of woe, to thee his plaints incline,
    And at thy feet with tears doth sue for grace,
      Which art the goddess of his chaste desire;
      Let not thy frowns these labours poor deface
      Although aloft they at the first aspire;
    And time shall come as yet unknown to men
    When I more large thy praises forth shall pen!

Griffin:

    Injurious Fates, to rob me of my bliss,
      And dispossess my heart of all his hope!
      You ought with just revenge to punish miss,
      For unto you the hearts of men are ope.
    Injurious Fates, that hardened have her heart,
      Yet make her face to send out pleasing smiles!
      And both are done but to increase my smart,
      And entertain my love with falsed wiles.
    Yet being when she smiles surprised with joy,
      I fain would languish in so sweet a pain,
      Beseeching death my body to destroy,
      Lest on the sudden she should frown again.
    When men do wish for death, Fates have no force;
    But they, when men would live, have no remorse.

Drayton:

    Why do I speak of joy or write of love,
    When my heart is the very den of horror,
    And in my soul the pains of hell I prove,
    With all his torments and infernal terror?
      What should I say? what yet remains to do?
    My brain is dry with weeping all too long;
    My sighs be spent in utt'ring of my woe,
    And I want words wherewith to tell my wrong.
      But still distracted in love's lunacy,
    And bedlam-like thus raving in my grief,
    Now rail upon her hair, then on her eye,
    Now call her goddess, then I call her thief;
      Now I deny her, then I do confess her,
      Now do I curse her, then again I bless her.
